# Dynamic Web Pages with JavaScript

## [What is JavaScript?](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript)

JavaScript (JS) is a lightweight, interpreted, or **just-in-time** compiled programming language with **first-class functions**. While it is most well-known as the scripting language for Web pages, many non-browser environments also use it, such as Node.js, Apache CouchDB and Adobe Acrobat. JavaScript is a **prototype-based**, multi-paradigm, **single-threaded**, **dynamic** language, supporting object-oriented, imperative, and declarative (e.g. functional programming) styles.

### [Just-in-time](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Just-in-time_compilation)

In computing, just-in-time (JIT) compilation (also dynamic translation or run-time compilations) is a way of executing computer code that involves compilation during execution of a program (at run time) rather than before execution. This may consist of source code translation but is more commonly bytecode translation to machine code, which is then executed directly. A system implementing a JIT compiler typically continuously analyses the code being executed and identifies parts of the code where the speedup gained from compilation or recompilation would outweigh the overhead of compiling that code.

### [First-class Functions](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Glossary/First-class_Function)

A programming language is said to have First-class functions when functions in that language are treated like any other variable. For example, in such a language, a function can be passed as an argument to other functions, can be returned by another function and can be assigned as a value to a variable.

### [Prototype-based](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Glossary/Prototype-based_programming)

Prototype-based programming is a style of object-oriented programming in which classes are not explicitly defined, but rather derived by adding properties and methods to an instance of another class or, less frequently, adding them to an empty object.

In simple words: this type of style allows the creation of an object without first defining its class.

### [Single-threaded](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Glossary/Thread)

Thread in computer science is the execution of running multiple tasks or programs at the same time. Each unit capable of executing code is called a thread.

### [Dynamic](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Glossary/Dynamic_typing)

Dynamically-typed languages are those (like JavaScript) where the interpreter assigns variables a type at runtime based on the variable's value at the time.

## [Introduction to JavaScript - basic output](https://code-maven.com/introduction-to-javascript)

We can distinguish 3 major parts of what we usually refer to as "JavaScript"

1. The language itself. This is fairly standard among the various environments, both in the various browsers and in the various server-side environments.
2. The DOM API - how the language can interact with the various parts of a web page while in the browser. While in this respect the various browsers are getting closer to each other they still differ. Several libraries, most prominently JQuery, is trying to provide a unified API.
3. The server API (or just API) provided by Node.js or one of the other server-side systems.

You can either embed the JavaScript code directly inside the HTML file, or you can link to an external JavaScript file. Most often the latter is used.

There are a number of ways to display text to the user. The most simple is `alert`

```javascript
alert("Hell World");
```

Or `document.write`

```javascript
document.write("<h1>Hello World</h1>");
```

In this example we have some text (First line), then the JavaScript code, and then some more text (Last line). The JavaScript code uses the document.write function to change the content of the page. It will embed the html snippet `<h1>Hello World</h1>` after the "First line", but before the "Last line".

Or `console.log`

Most of the web browsers provide what is called a "JavaScript console". It is an additional window which is normally not visible, where the browser can print out warnings and errors generated by the execution of the JavaScript code. 

## [JavaScript promt and confirm](https://code-maven.com/javascript-input-with-prompt-and-confirm)

Neither of these is used a lot, but to receive input you can use `prompt` or `confirm`

```javascript
var name = prompt("Your name:", "");
document.write("Hello ", name);
```

In either case, if the user presses cancel or hits the ESC the prompt() function will return null.

The other pop-up is not really an input method. It allows the developer to ask a Yes/No question. Calling the `confirm()` function will show a pop-up window with the provided texts and with two buttons. If the user presses `OK` the `confirm()` function will return `true`, if the user presses cancel or hits the ESC key, the function will return `false`.

```javascript
if (confirm("Shall I print Hello World?")) {
    document.write("Hello World");
} else {
    document.write("OK, I won't print it.");
}
```
